what is an exchange okay uh we're going
to talk about it from the perspective of
the the data structures and the messages
uh that get passed around to do what an
exchange does right and so so the first
data structure we're going to talk about
is really just you know the limit order
book and this is a NASDAQ workstation
style book where it's got the the best
prices to buy on this side and the best
prices to sell on this side and see that
uh buys are sorted in decreasing order
because when you sell something you'd
like to get the highest price for it and
sales or offers are sorted in increasing
order because when you when you buy
something you'd like to buy it as as
cheaply as possible uh you'll sometimes
see what's known as a ladder view where
the sales are on top and then the buys
and then the inside or the touch is
where they meet um I don't use that
because somebody has a patent on it and
they went around suing People based on
that representation so we try to avoid
that
um but you will see that
representation uh so in this book so
we've got you know some different Market
participants and these are just
fictional Market participants for those
of you from Goldman and bamel uh in the
audience
uh and uh and so you know this is
essentially the the representation and
we could talk about the data structures
you might choose for keeping this once
you understood the heuristics but um I
imagine that that's uh that's pretty
clear and so what are the key messages
so somebody can place a new order saying
that they'd like to buy this particular
instrument in this case Apple at 3329
for 500 shares and you could see that
the book is sorted in it's going to be
probably sorted in price and time and so
they're sorted right there so that's one
transaction somebody would like to place
an order to buy or
sell uh now here's another one so in
this case this participant decides they
want to sell at $ 3329 and this one is
special
in the sense that as we noticed before
these prices the bids were strictly
lower than the offers so in this case
he's selling and he's selling at a price
that we would say is marketable right
and so automically this is going to
create a trade and they're actually
going to exchange shares of apple right
there and so the system is going to just
deterministically apply its rules and
generate executions going back to the
individual participants
okay uh and of course you'd like to be
able to cancel if you had an order
outstanding and you'd no longer want to
buy or sell at that price you need to be
able to pull it back uh and that's
basically it that's probably about I'd
say add orders are probably half the
messages in the market um cancels are
probably like 30 or 40% there's some
cancel replaces which are a combination
of those two uh and executions are
probably 1 or 2% and then the rest is
basically
noise okay any questions on that
hopefully this is pretty transparent to
most people painfully bored yet
no uh and of course we have uh you know
multiple instances of these uh of these
instruments uh but I would say it's not
even clear that we do because there are
certain kinds of order types and
situations where you'd actually like to
reach across and touch two instruments
atomically and so it's not true that in
all cases it would be clear that you
would want to paralyze at the level of
of an instrument
uh so what are the
requirements so generally in the US
equities Market you got to have a lot of
scale and by scale I
mean
probably about 3 million messages per
second at Peak rates um you have
thousands of participants in connections
and you're trying to coordinate uh their
activity uh you probably have several
million live orders and in US equities
maybe around 10,000 symbols and there
are different markets with different
requirements but we're going to stay
somewhat inside side of those uh those
heuristics you really want
fairness and so you've got a bunch of
people who are competing against each
other and you're trying to have the
information arrive to all of those
participants at the same time as much as
possible right uh it's gotten a lot of
scrutiny in the past uh decade or so and
a lot of the fairness issues are are
small things that even crop up
unintentionally um people just you know
say I don't know why but this system on
this connection seems to be performing
better and so some people are hunting
for advantages I guess most participants
are and some are just recognizing that
in aggregate some things are performing
better than others uh I often tell the
story that when I was at island and we
um we had TCP connections for Market
data uh we had one system that started
to Multiplex and handle multiple
connections and we just had a for Loop
where we would connect all the
connections and uh you know aggregate
them up and when we sent out messages
we'd Loop over them and send them out
out and so what do you guys think
happened everyone tried to get it first
from the moment we shut the exchange
down to the moment we brought it up the
next day there were thousands of
connections per second just trying to be
the first guy in that list um and so
you'll see that a lot of the
architecture we thinking about how we
can make this information appear
simultaneously in multiple
places uh you really want reliability I
think that partially that's obvious um
and you need durability if we tell two
participants that they have traded
they're going to then that's going to
set off a chain of events that's going
to cause them to commit capital in other
places do other trades and if you forget
or tell people no no no just kidding or
I told you did you trade you didn't
you've really upset a lot of people and
uh created a lot of problems and
different systems can tolerate different
amounts of it uh exchanges have limited
liability legal stock exchanges what we
run here one of the businesses we run is
known as a single dealer market and
doesn't have the same kind of
protections so we have to be extra
careful and you really need to be robust
to bad clients um you can't really have
somebody who's badly behaved affecting
other participants and badly behaved
could be
because they're just optimizing for
something different than you are and
you've put incentives in place in your
order types that
created this design for them to do
something that is essentially uh painful
or they're just careless there's lots of
lots of reasons one of the examples I
give going back to the previous slide
you may have
noticed when this
firm
sells at
3329 what price does gsco get see
there's an overlap and so there's
there's a decision that needs to be made
here as to who gets that price
Improvement we say say and it's
traditionally done such that the price
Improvement is given to the aggressive
order encouraging people to send their
most aggressive price in case the book
is changing at that time uh there was a
system that there there are various
order types and systems that don't do
that but instanet many years ago did not
do that and they had hidden orders
inside that if you overlapped with them
they would get that gain and so what do
you think happened very quickly you
started to see orders that would try
every price point walking down walking
down walking down walking down until
they got until they got an
execution so you want to think about
those incentives when you when you
design these
systems uh so we're going to put
together what has often been called a
crazy design and I know that when I
first saw it I kind of looked at it like
really and uh it was particularly
interesting when some senior NASDAQ
technologist this would have been around
2002 would come in to get a description
of the system because people were fairly
friendly
and you know NASDAQ was running on big
main frames and tandems and you know we
we told them that actually we take the
entire market and we run it through a
single uh prototypical x86 machine
that's it just one it's that one over
there called Monster because it's a big
one I mean we bought like the best one
dell made but but that's it and uh and
the gentleman would kind of walk around
and be like you can tell me where where
is it really like no no no I I know it's
here somewhere like come on come on
but uh but no that was
it and uh so here's our design that's
it uh we're going to
have single application we're going to
call the matching engine and we're going
to have some client ports which accept
connections to individual clients um and
they're going to perform transactions
with the matching engine send order
cancel Etc and the matching engine is
just going to keep the data structure in
memory right there and that's it and
he's going to acknowledge the responses
back to those
ports there's more though
just um but we have other applications
that are interested we have something we
call drop ports in in the industry and
so you know there may be somebody who
clears or guarantees those trades and
they would like to know the activity of
their participants and so this drop Port
he might need information from this port
he might even need some information from
this port cuz he could be clearing for
you know a single port could have
multiple um entities submitting orders
on it you might have hundreds of ports
and he may need some arbitrary
combination of all of them
okay and you'd also like that
information to be equally
timely we need to tell the public we
need a trade reporter so that when
transactions happen we go to a trade
reporting facility and we tell them that
these happen and we want those to happen
again on parody with all the rest of
these and we want that to be
fair most exchanges have some system of
Market data where they're telling you
what's happening on the system at the
same time and generally it's really just
an anonymized and and slightly filtered
version of the raw transactions I showed
you before that's going to hide some of
the names certain kinds of hidden
activity isn't shown but by and large
he's just showing you the transaction
log as it happens so that you can build
your own copy of the market and follow
along
so everybody always likes this name um
but since the matching engine's got a
lot to do we try really hard to factor
out as much logic as we can outside of
that and one of the examples that's
regularly given is something we had
called the cancel fairy and so people
would place an order and say I'd like
this canceled in 2 minutes and I'd like
this one canceled in 20 seconds and this
one by the end of the day and this one
in four minutes and the matching engine
was like ah noise you either want it
canceled immediately or sometime in the
future and if it was sometime in the
future he acknowledged it and there was
somebody who was observing those
transactions who would then send the
cancel on his behalf two minutes later
and you would run three or four of those
one of them could crash it wouldn't
really be a problem they would race with
each other it was what it was and it was
also nice
because you know the The Core Business
of placing and cancelling orders was
kept extremely simple and you can layer
a lot of functionality sort of off to
the
side uh other complex matching scenarios
like auctions typically also done
outside of that the auction process you
know the The Continuous limit order book
where the orders are coming in matching
immediately and moving on that's pretty
straightforward in auctions you're going
to aggregate a whole lot of orders often
at overlaping prices and then you're
going to run an optimization to find the
price that maximizes the shares traded
right and that can take some time and so
that optimization is run independent of
the rest of the transactions that are
going on and the results are sort of
shot over to the matching engine to
report back to uh to
clients uh so we've got a lot of systems
here that all need to get this
information at the same time right any
ideas on how we're going to do
that thoughts any network programmers in
the
crowd
multicast uh how many people know what
multicast
is all right most people um so for those
of you that don't uh tcpip networking
has built into a lot of the hardware the
network cards and the switches more
importantly the ability to have logical
addresses that when you send a packet to
this address it's electronically
repeated to every interested party
relatively
simultaneously um it's really powerful
and without it this kind of architecture
really would not work but it means that
when the matching engine accepts an
order or produces an execution both
parties to that execution see it at the
same time the market data sees it at the
same time the drop Port Sees at the same
time the trade report Sees at the same
time etc etc
etc there's only one
downside this is UDP which means it's
unreliable there are no sequence numbers
there are no knacks because it's not
really connection oriented you have to
be prepared for the fact that these
messages can get
dropped and so we add to that a series
of
retransmits and these are just servers
whose sole job is to record the messages
that have that have been
seen and if they missed the message
identified by like some sequence number
on the message they ask each other and
if they if neither of them has it they
can ask the matching engine who does
keep you know an in memory copy of the
messages that he's generated and hence
can resend to them and so we've kind of
insulated the matching engine a bit and
um yet provided some uh some
reliability so any questions so far you
thrown kind of a lot of boxes on there
yep okay so I gather the port boxes are
not actually tcpip ports in traditional
since that's a separate machine doing
essentially some sort of load balance
for client it's generally a process that
presents to each client a TCP connection
you know there's a variety of Industry
standard protocols where you need to
provide I mean like fix or other
slightly more efficient ones where you
need to provide your clients an in order
you know sequenced list of messages
related to their
trading um that's typically TCP the
transaction internally here is entirely
UDP but the port is not a port on the
matching engine uh NOP it's typically an
entirely separate application and the
matching engine I mean I guess you could
think of each box as a process think of
it that way typically we would also keep
these like these lines you know
practically speaking a lot of these
things are multi homes so there's a
private Network which has a lot of this
multicast traffic which involves every
participant's trading and then there's
like a public access network which
involves some access control and some
firewalls and things like that and so
the the the machines running ports are
typically you know spanning those those
uh those two
networks
um yes does the CL connect to the port
via TCP typically yes typically yes um
there have been other other options but
generally this port allows us the
opportunity to insulate ourselves from
Bad clients and to normalize a lot of
the information and offload some work so
one example
is the matching engine typically has
very efficient data structures where he
pre-allocate all the representations for
orders and he saves them in memory and
so when he acknowledges an order he
essentially gives a pointer back to the
port saying well this is the order that
I acknowledge is right here he's not not
going to return that that memory address
to the client but he holds on to it and
when the cancel comes from the client
and he does a variety of work checking
to make sure that a number of things are
valid this isn't a token that's been
reused in the day he then looks it up he
finds it and then he sends that back to
the matching Engine with this locate
number as like a cheat code to find it
really quick right so the ports are
doing quite a lot of in uh lot of work
for us and they're also controlling uh
or they're providing some level of flow
control which we're probably going to
talk a little bit about uh later and
that's one of the problems that comes up
with UDP is that you know you don't have
any throttling UDP is not going to
essentially be concerned with the health
of the network
generally okay um but now that we have
this this retransmitter we can build
these applications to be able to replay
all the messages from the beginning of
the day and so if we have the discipline
to write each of these applications
using the kinds of techniques that I
guess in distributed systems are called
State machine replication where each of
these applications is written just to
maintain a certain series of state and
just deterministically apply these
transactions which have been ordered by
the matching engine bit by bit to build
up their state then we can sort of shoot
any of these in the head and rebuild
exactly what they had so if a client
Port has a hardware problem you can
bring up another one on say another
machine or the same machine move the IP
to that other machine and when that
process comes up replays all the
activity from a r transmitter he
rebuilds all of his currently open
orders he rebuilds what the sequence
messages were that he was doing with
that client if some happened while he
was down um getting switched over he's
going to also add those and so when the
client reconnects they're going to
exchange and have a handshake where
they're going to agree on well I saw up
to sequence number n he say well
actually I have n plus 2 and he's going
to send them the next two messages and
then everybody is
synchronized okay everybody follow
that okay there is a minor problem with
this we're missing certainly at least
one
thing what's the system that I can't
shoot in the
head matching engine so how we got to
fix that presumably before we start we
did fix that
right hold on um so anybody have any
ideas on how we can uh how we can fix
that we run a secondary matching engine
but what does he
do what does he listen
to he well yes so he's going to come up
and he's going to listen to not the
ports because this is totally the order
in which the UDP packets are arriving at
the passive matching engine there there
totally no guarantee there so what he
actually listens to is is the matching
engine's
output he's able to and we'll see some
messages later he's able to essentially
identify only those messages that the
clients uh submitted and he's going to
essentially run the identical State
machine and actually The Identical code
that the primary matching engine is
running and hence he's going to if the
matching engine were to die in the midst
of a transaction like the earlier one we
saw where the order comes in and it
generates two executions let's say he
generates one and then es the passive
matching engine doesn't care because as
long as he saw the order that inspired
it he's going to just mechanically
generate those identical messages right
alongside right uh and then we do have a
careful process by which if we lost this
matching engine an operator switches
over to this one and there are systems
like paxos which essentially have
algorithms to vote and decide on a you
know a a primary talker who's going to
be doing the sequencing
those algorithms are pretty complicated
and they involve an extra round trip and
and a hop and so I don't know of any
exchanges that actually use um anything
like that most of them essentially have
failover mechanisms that are pretty
close to this and
um kind of curious if anybody is aware
of any or if anybody actually worked on
any paos
implementations no okay um question the
code how correlated they are how what
correlated if a sequence of events crash
the first one what's the probability of
the second yeah it's a really good it's
a really good question um well the from
a code perspective yes right um
certainly you might have some uh
differences in Hardware uh OS issues
things like that um but yeah we have to
be really careful about this estate
machine and making sure
that what's on here is extremely clean
extremely clean uh and we do a lot of
testing and functional languages are
[Laughter]
good but yes clo points out a very good
point that you know it's a little it's a
little subtle it's a little brittle it's
a double EDG SW it is it is um but but
that is actually the way it works that
is actually what we do and you can
certainly bring up a matching engine you
know in the midst of the day towards the
end of the day and rebuild that state
right so why do we need to be fast right
we need to be fast for sort of the
obvious reasons um the millions of
transactions that we're doing but we
also need the the applications those
little boxes to be really efficient
because everyone sees every message so
you really have to have a strategy for
discarding those things that you're not
interested in and you've got to be able
to do it
quickly latency determines throughput we
have a simple flow control mechanism
those ports can only do a single
transaction at a time one unacknowledged
transaction in flight so that TCP Port
that the connections are uh are made to
clients they can keep sending orders but
it has a very small socket buffer and if
they fill it up those rights will block
and it will essentially push back
through the normal TCB Windows system
right um so the throughput of any one
port is really a function of the latency
in the system and so we're using a lot
of a lot of tech techniques relatively
commodity Hardware to keep those numbers
down in the low singled digigit microsc
so the internal transactions are
extremely
quick replay um there are ways to get
around the recovery taking a long time
you can essentially have servers that
transfer the current state to a machine
without having to replay the whole state
but the more diverse set of applications
you have this becomes more of a pain so
if you can essentially rebuild the state
of any application inside of 30 seconds
or a minute you really don't need to do
any more work than that and so the speed
allows us to keep the system really
simple uh from that
perspective um and you know this is
actually doable with like I said
relatively commodity Hardware we do buy
like nice Nick cards but but relatively
commodity hardware and we do it with
safe languages I've done it in
everything from C++ uh Java and now in
oaml and oaml has really been uh a great
language to do it in I have probably a
whole another talk where I can talk
about some of the things that we did to
um get oaml to Raw memory C Level
performance and um you know the runtime
is actually quite simple and that's a
real benefit I think it was actually
harder to do reliably with Java because
a more complex uh garbage collector a
more complex um multi-threaded runtime
makes it really really hard to um to to
get this level of determinism and so
we're going to talk about that uh more
probably in future talks um but we don't
do it with the standard idioms and when
I did it in Java or in O camel you can't
use you know tons of defer and and and
you know allocate things all over the
place basically the applications involve
data arrives ideally without any copies
involved whatsoever it arrives in memory
you read some values out you change some
data structures on the side usually with
pulled values that you reuse you go back
and you do it again and you aim to
allocate very little in the critical
path and you aim to um be prepared up
front with all the memory you're really
going to
need uh so there is more parallelism
that's possible with this system what's
an obvious form of
parallelism yeah symbols symbols jumps
up as as one and but again that has to
be done carefully right when you
paralyze at the level of a symbol you
lose some things um that we really enjoy
so one of the things we do at Jam Street
we do a lot of ETF Market making uh ETFs
you have a lot of ETFs that have very
common components and overlaps and
factors and so we like to be able to set
risk limits across the whole Market that
we can enforce atomically in the
matching engine and so if we really do
parallelize and we're matching
independently we lose a lot of that
ability and so while you can certainly
do it in a variety of ways um it's not
always
ideal there's certainly a decent amount
of parallelism you can do certainly
within a machine to have multiple cores
although strangely enough and this is
going to get a little into the weeds I
think that the vast majority of the gain
comes in having multiple memory fetches
going out at the same time so when I've
profiled some of these matching engines
that are running really really really
fast they actually spend about 30% of
their time on a single line of code and
that is remember I told you that pointer
it's actually not really a pointer it's
typically just an array index um D
referencing that and finding the order
generally is a cach miss that is one of
the slowest parts of the machine so when
you actually operate on multiple cores
at once you're essentially have memory
memory PR prefetches going at at the
same time so you actually could read so
say like the next batch of messages
issue prefetches for those and probably
do similar um though not not quite as
well uh now if you parallel paralyze the
whole system at the level of a symbol
you really kind of need to give people
different ports because if we're going
to give you a single sequenced stream of
messages going back to this architecture
if I stack up matching engines but my
client still has a single port well now
I've got a problem right I'm injecting
State that's not recoverable right here
when I decide that order that I'm going
to present it to the client right
everybody follow
that uh there was some exchanges that
did that they had multiple matching
engines they had one essentially
sequence stream and I think the the cost
and the complexity caused them to say
you know what we're actually going to
give you one connection but we're going
to give you multiple sequence number
spaces and we make no guarantees that
we're going to give you them back in the
same order we're just going to
essentially proxy connections for you
and that's it uh and if you're going to
replicate at the level of symbols you're
basically replicating this whole
thing and you've just got multiple
instances of this architecture uh for
the options Market NASDAQ did that they
had multiple instances and then they had
another one in front of it to hide that
that was happening and people were
concerned about the latency and over
time they eventually just went directly
to what they called the Rings
themselves I want to talk a little bit
about the um in a little more detail
what I call the Locking um which is
essentially how we deal with uh
transactions that are trying to change
the same
state when I worked on this system uh
back in the island days we actually were
very uh specialized for the transactions
in uh trading we were looking at each
transaction and we were trying to say oh
okay I I asked for this to happen I got
this message back from the matching
engine does that satisfy what I was
doing well I sent an order and this was
a cancel and and there was a lot of
business logic in that so uh over time I
started to try to generalize it so that
I didn't care necessarily what the
transaction was and uh so what we have
now is every message has a unique topic
and you could just think of each topic
as some independent lock uh and we have
a sequence number per topic again this
is different than the total sequence
number that we've assigned uh to all the
individual
messages so uh each contributor and a
contributor is a port uh essentially
tries to propose the next transaction
and assign the next sequence number for
that topic and if someone else gets it
he essentially has to give up accept
that their transaction happened change
his State machine and then try again
this is another reason for the one
inlight semantics because this roll back
process is a lot easier if you remember
the message that caused you to want to
propose a transaction and it turns out
you kind of to roll it back to some
extent you really only have to keep that
one
message uh and so this is my attempt of
doing this in a uh in a timing diagram
anybody remember the Richard Stevens
books on tcpip it's like a Steven style
time
time uh so this is a little
unfortunately named but um P1 is the
first port and so this P1 here is
essentially the the publisher the the
guy sending this transaction uh this
second P1 is the
topic uh then we have the sequence
number and then we have the actual
message what is he trying to do okay so
port number one tries to buy 4350 100
shares the matching engine sees it and
he says okay is is three the next
sequence number for port number one it
is great okay he basically just turns it
right back around multicast it out
everybody sees that a new order has been
acknowledged second report does the
same P2 that's the publisher P2 is the
topic uh 8 is the sequence number in
this case he's selling at 4349 and note
these two overlap right this is a
marketable order so we have to generate
a transaction who generates the
transaction it's going to be the
matching engine so can anybody guess
what the next message is going to look
like probably have a 50-50
shot
no all right well then I'll show
you so the matching engine is the
publisher in this case and he's
publishing on p2's topic n p1's topic so
eight was the the sequence number that
this guy asked for he got that and then
he also got a nine which said that he
successfully sold those 100 shares and
topic number P1 he also got a message
indicating that he bought those shares
right so what's an instance of a
collision that we could have
here
P1 actually at this time not knowing
that this transaction happened tries to
generate a cancel he tries to pull that
order back from the market right well as
far as he's concerned that's sequence
number four right he sends it to the
matching engine the matching engine
looks at it and says is four the next
sequence number for P1 no it's not right
four is already already happened so what
does the matching engine do nothing he
doesn't reject it he doesn't Knack it he
just drops it on the ground because he
knows that all these messages are
reliable and this guy is going to
eventually see that four happened when
he does he says oh great I was waiting
for
four but
unfortunately it wasn't my four he knows
that because the publisher ID doesn't
match it was not the one that he sent so
he then has to take this execution apply
it which removes that order right then
he says okay let me go look again at
what I was trying to do before all this
happened says I was trying to cancel
this order let me try cancel what order
the order's gone right so now he has to
generate a cancel reject again that's
going to be now for sequence number five
because he's already applied for and
he's going to bounce that off the
matching engine and all is well and
good okay um now this is a little
special uh for certain kinds of
transactions you could get into
something like a live lock scenario
where people were continually fighting
on this spin but for these kinds of
transactions most of these terminate
pretty quickly because it's usually a
case like this where this order is now
gone and so you don't get a lot of
transactions that can actually persist
um but there is some judgment in how you
apply this kind of uh this kind of
architecture for
sure okay why do you have to send a
councel reject to the matching Eng but
does matching Eng have to know that it's
a good question you think it was a
planted question because I people always
ask that and it's like part of the slide
is like why do I have to do that um it's
actually because of the protocol in the
protocol cancel rejects are sequenced
and if it's sequenced I can't I can't
essentially add that to my state because
if I crash I can't replicate it right so
anything that you're going to take
action on that you're going to show to a
client that you're going to change your
state machine with has to essentially
come from that Global totally ordered
stream of messages right uh if the
protocol said cancel rejects are just
kind of a thing that I send and I don't
remember them and move on then you don't
have to do that but but thanks for
asking good bow
tie everybody see that PO tie it's nice
how do you protect against the matching
right
to how do you protect against the
matching engine doing a dual right
against two topics I'm not sure I follow
the question walk me through the
matching engine is sending two messages
two ports and if one of those fails then
that doesn't seem Atomic or maybe I'm
misunderstanding well also a good
question the only thing that has to
happen is this
cell if he dies writing this message or
writing that message we don't really
care because as long as we have a
passive matching engine as long as we
can bring up that logic and we get as
far as this message he's going to
mechanically generate those next couple
messages because he's just going to
apply the state machine he's going to
deterministically apply those rules he's
going to generate those messages the the
passive matching engine actually ignores
those messages from the publisher ID me
because he should be able to generate
them and so you know there is some
carefulness that these messages are
Atomic and that's at the level of like a
UDP packet and you know in the sequence
numbers right so you don't really get a
partial message per se that would be a
problem but as long as that message
happens
then this is going to flow on does that
does that answer your question yeah you
agree yes
good okay so what are the takeaways um
speed people talk about speed in the
financial markets it's not just for
speed's sake speed and determinism do
translate to better prices but they do
allow us to do things with the
architecture and keep things simple in a
way that we couldn't if we couldn't hit
some of these performance
numbers State machine replication it's a
really great technique it makes things
extremely testable um repeatable it's a
really beautiful way to program when we
roll out new matching engines we replay
all and when I say we I mean Pete we
replay uh you know weeks of past uh data
through that state machine um in
addition to doing you know sort of fuzz
testing and things like that where we
make up messages and put them through
and
um State machine replication lets us do
that in a in a really easy way now you
need a certain amount of discipline you
can't just act on the timer on that box
you you have to come up with ways where
anything where you would like to change
the state has to essentially be
represented um but once you fall into
that it's it's a very nice programming
model um the determinism is great you
know again like I said um you know if if
a regulator wants to know why did you do
this transaction at this time there's
really no uncertainty it's not well I
have multiple threads and I might have
gotten this quote at this time time nope
I know exactly what I knew at every
point in time when I made a decision and
that is super super
helpful uh as I talked about before more
parallelism is possible and um I'm happy
to go into some of the the details about
where I think that's uh that's doable
and what some people are doing uh about
it now I know that um like the the
NASDAQ matching engine I believe is
running like eight threads and they have
sort of an Ingress thread they fan out
and they have symbols allocated to the
different cores and then I think they're
bringing back together for publication
uh there's lots of different ways to do
it it's a really interesting problem at
least I certainly uh think so and even
though it's a it's a crazy looking
design as as as Ron has said a lot of
these design decisions hang together
right each one of them by themselves you
know I could argue but when you look
when you step back and you look at the
whole picture it really creates a system
that that solves a lot of the problems
that exchanges have in a nice clean way
um and and scales fairly naturally
so if you found this
interesting we're glad you came we hope
you enjoy the food we'd like you to take
a t-shirt but
also sorry that's that's the hardest
sell I'm going to
give um but uh but that's it I'm happy
to take uh any questions